Before we can understand all the parts of
the EKG waveform we need to first learn more about how the heart works.
The heart is made up of four chambers,
the left and right atria and the left and right ventricles.
The atria pump first and they pump blood into
the ventricles which then pump blood throughout the rest of the body.
It might seem that this diagram is labeled incorrectly with
the left chambers showing up on the right side,
but whenever we look at organs like
this they are labeled from the perspective of the wearer.
So this is the left side of the person whose heart this belongs to.
Each heart cell is polarized,
which means that there is
a different charge on the inside of the cell membrane relative to the outside.
At rest the inside of the cell is negatively charged,
and then when the cell depolarizes,
positive ions on the outside move in.
Depolarization causes the heart cell to contract and the movement of these charges
across the heart cell membrane is the source of
the electrical activity that we measure with an EKG.
The conduction of electrical impulses throughout the heart follows
a very regular pattern orchestrated by the cardiac conduction system.
Each heartbeat starts with an impulse in
the sinus node which is sometimes called the natural pacemaker of the heart.
This impulse spreads throughout the atria causing the atria to contract,
and then it's propagated to the atrioventricular or AV node.
The AV node will briefly delay
the propagation of the signal to allow time for the atria to
contract and then will spread
the signal throughout the ventricles causing the ventricular contraction,
which is the largest electrical disturbance that we see in the EKG wave.
After some time the ventricles will repolarize,
meaning that the ions in these cells will move
back across the cell wall to their initial resting state.
Each part of the sequence is responsible for creating
a distinct marker or wave in the EKG signal.
So first we see the P wave which is a result of the atrial contraction,
and then we have this pause caused by the AV node,
after which we see the large QRS complex which is a result of the ventricles contracting.
Then after another pause we see the T wave caused by repolarization of the ventricles.
The atria will also repolarize after their contraction,
but that occurs sometime during the end of
the ventricular contraction so that electrical activity is obscured by the S wave.
Here we can see an animation of the electrical activity
in the heart and then the corresponding signal we see in the EKG.
This results in a very regular cycle that repeats
every heartbeat with corresponding waves
being roughly equidistant in successive heartbeats.
Now that we've seen how the various parts of the EKG wave are created,
we can look at building an algorithm to detect the most prominent waves, the QRS complex.